
# Process


## Parsing Python

While we could parse source files directly (and may eventually do so), we can take advantage of some built-in Python features to jump ahead to the interesting parts.

### Abstract Syntax Tree

Python has a module [ast](https://docs.python.org/3/library/ast.html) that generates an AST (abstract syntax tree). To see this in action evaluate the following:

```bash
pprintast -a -t tests/hello.py
```

If at some point we want to remove the dependency on CPython then we could consider some alternatives. Some of these generate Smalltalk code, while others generate C or C++ code.

* [PetitParser](https://petitparser.github.io) - either Smalltalk or Python
* [SmaCC](https://refactory.com/smacc/) - Smalltalk Compiler Compiler (on [GitHub](https://github.com/j-brant/SmaCC))
* Flex/Bison
* [ANTLR](https://www.antlr.org/) - [Python Grammar](https://github.com/antlr/grammars-v4/tree/master/python/python3_13)


### Build an AST using Smalltalk objects

Our initial approach is to let Python generate an AST for us and then use the text representation to build our own AST. We will use the [abstract grammar](https://docs.python.org/3/library/ast.html) as a guide to hand-build subclasses of AstNode.

* `ModuleAst` represents a Python module. It is the root of the AST and is the entry point for parsing a Python file.
* `SuiteAst` represents a suite of statements. While it is not directly generated by the `ast` module, it is a useful construct for grouping statements, such as those in a `for` loop or an `if` statement.
* `BlockAst` is a subclass of `SuiteAst` that represents a block of code with its own local variables. This is used for a module and a function.
* `StatementAst` is an abstract class that represents a statement in the AST.
* `ExpressionAst` is an abstract class that represents an expression in the AST.

### Translate the AST to Smalltalk Code

Once we have translated the AST string to Smalltalk objects then we can traverse the tree and generate Smalltalk code. Each AST node has a `printSmalltalkOn:` method that will generate the corresponding Smalltalk code. To manage precedence, there is also a `printSmalltalkWithParenthesisOn:` method that will generate the code with parentheses. Most AST nodes have `attributes` properties that contains information about the position of the node in the Python source (eventually we will use this for error reporting and debugging).

The Smalltalk source is written to a `PrettyWriteStream` that manages indentation. The `#tab` method adds a tab to the output stream, but avoids our `#nextPut:` method which calls `#tab` (and would otherwise create an infinite recursion). While we could go directly from the AST to bytecodes, we are choosing to generate Smalltalk source for now. This will allow us to use the existing GemStone compiler and runtime. It also makes it easier to debug and test our code. In the future we may explore generating bytecodes directly.

## Runtime Objects

### `Variables`

One of the challenges in implementing a language is handling variable scoping. Python has a complex set of rules for variable scoping that we need to implement correctly. We will use a `Variables` class to manage the scope of variables. This class will be responsible for creating new scopes, looking up variables, and managing the lifetime of variables.

### `Object` vs. `object`

When working with the Grail code (in the `smalltalk` folder) it is important to keep in mind the distinction between Python code (as modeled by the `*Ast` objects) and objects (subclasses of `object`) on one hand and Smalltalk code (in the `smalltalk/*.gs` files) and objects (subclasses of `Object`).
In most cases a Python object will be represented in Smalltalk by a class (such as `str`) with an instance variable `value` that holds a Smalltalk object that is equivalent to the Python value. The "Python" object will have methods that match those in CPython (some will be "dunder" methods with double underlines before and after, while some will be regular methods without double underlines). Some methods will be specific to Grail and called from Smalltalk; these are preceeded by triple underlines.
